sudo (Lab)
It is very dangerous to run a root shell unless absolutely necessary: a single typo or other mistake can cause serious (even fatal) damage. Thus, the sensible procedure is to configure things such that single commands may be run with superuser privilege, by using the sudo mechanism. With sudo, the user only needs to know their own password, and never needs to know the root password.

If you are using a distribution such as Ubuntu, you may not need to do this lab to get sudo configured properly for the course. However, you should still make sure you understand the procedure.

To check if your system is already configured to let the user account you are using run sudo, just do a simple command like:

1
$ sudo ls
You should be prompted for your user password, and then the command should execute. If, instead, you get an error message, you need to execute the following procedure.

Launch a root shell by typing su and then giving the root password, not your user password.

On all recent Linux distributions, you should navigate to the /etc/sudoers.d subdirectory and create a file, usually with the name of the user to whom root wishes to grant sudo access. However, this convention is not actually necessary, as sudo will scan all files in this directory as needed. The file can simply contain:

1
student ALL=(ALL)  ALL
if the user is student.

An older practice (which certainly still works) is to add such a line at the end of the file /etc/sudoers. It is best to do so using the visudo program, which is careful about making sure you use the right syntax in your edit.

It may not be obvious to you how to create or edit such a file, especially if you are logged in as a normal user and then have used su to run as root.

In particular, using a graphical editor such as gedit would require dealing with some complications because root does not own the display screen.

If you are not yet familiar with using vi or emacs you can easily use nano, which is very simple to use and has information in the bottom panel about all needed commands. So, you could do:

123
$ nano student
...
Ctr-X (to save file and exit)
Or you can type at the command line:

123
cat << EOF > student
student ALL=(ALL)  ALL
EOF
You probably also need to set proper permissions on the file by typing:

1
$ chmod 440 /etc/sudoers.d/student
Note some Linux distributions may require 400 instead of 440 for the permissions.

After you have done these steps, exit the root shell by typing exit and then try to do sudo ls again.

There are many other ways an administrator can configure sudo, including specifying only certain permissions for certain users, limiting searched paths, etc. The /etc/sudoers file is very well self-documented.

However, there is one more setting we highly recommend you do, even if your system already has sudo configured. Most distributions establish a different path for finding executables for normal users as compared to root users. In particular, the directories /sbin and /usr/sbin are not searched, since sudo inherits the PATH of the user, not the full root user.

Thus, in this course we would have to be constantly reminding you of the full path to many system administration utilities; any enhancement to security is probably not worth the extra typing and figuring out which directories these programs are in. Consequently, we suggest you add the following line to the .bashrc file in your home directory:

1
PATH=$PATH:/usr/sbin:/sbin
If you log out and then log in again (you do not have to reboot), this will be fully effective.
